
Nikto is an Open Source software written in Perl language that is used to scan a web-server for the vulnerability that can be exploited and can compromise the server. It can also check for outdated version details of 1200 server and can detect problems with specific version details of over 200 servers. It can also fingerprint server using favicon.ico files present in the server. It is not designed to be a particularly a stealth tool rather than it is designed to be fast and time-efficient to achieve the task in very little time. Because of this, a web admin can easily detect that its server is being scanned by looking into the log files. 
It can also show some items that do not have security problem but are info only which shows how to take full use of it to secure the web-server more properly. 

Features: 
 

Full support for SSL
Finds sub-domain
Supports full HTTP Proxy
Outdated component report
Result saved in multiple format (xml, csv etc)
Username guessing
Gives details of installed software
Takes Nmap file as input to scan port in a web-server.
Able to perform dictionary attack.
Updated easily
Nikto is a free software command-line vulnerability scanner that scans webservers for dangerous files/CGIs, outdated server software and other problems. It performs generic and server type specific checks. It also captures and prints any cookies received. The Nikto code itself is free software, but the data files it uses to drive the program are not.[1] Version 1.00 was released December 27, 2001.

Features
Nikto can detect over 6700 potentially dangerous files/CGIs, checks for outdated versions of over 1250 servers, and version specific problems on over 270 servers. It also checks for server configuration items such as the presence of multiple index files and HTTP server options, and will attempt to identify installed web servers and software. Scan items and plugins are frequently updated and can be automatically updated.

Variations
There are some variations of Nikto, one of which is MacNikto. MacNikto is an AppleScript GUI shell script wrapper built in Apple's Xcode and Interface Builder, released under the terms of the GPL. It provides easy access to a subset of the features available in the command-line version, installed along with the MacNikto application.[2][3]

VUln Scanning?
process of discovering analyzing and reportingthe security flaws and vulnerabiloties
VS are conducted using automated vuln scnning tools like nikto , to identify the potential risk exposures and attack vectors for an organizations

Vuln assessment?
VA is process of defining , identifying classifying and prioritizing vuln in systems, applications it provides orgs with necessary knowledge , awarness and risk backgrounds to understand and react to threats to its environment
the risk they pose 

what is CVE
CVE stands for Common Vulnerabilities and exposures , it is a database of publically disclosed information securituy issues 
Before CVE it was very diff to share data on vulnerabilities across diss datases , each vendors manintained their own databses 
but bcoz of CVE we can share and get mote info about diff diff common publically vulns
cve is assigned a no known as CVE id 
format --> CVE-[year]-[number]
CVSS common vulnerability scroring system
classifies vulns, and produes a numerical score reflecting its severity alsong scale of 0-10
10 being higehst 0 lowest sevirty
